# Project Proposal
For millennia, humans have predicted climate patterns in order to properly structure their lives and activities. Whether it be for ensuring a safe journey or drawing great crop yields, forecasting the climate has been a catalyst for the development of human civilization. The same rings true today. In the face of climate change, humans have once again found the need to increase the accuracy of their climate predictions to save lives and maintain order. In this project, I have set out to predict the predefined target variables.

I will be using the following dataset from kaggle.com. Both the training and test sets are generated by E3SM-MMF climate model, a model that combines cloud physics with massive exascale throughput and published by an Arxiv lab group called ClimSim.

This will be a supervised regression problem. The independent and target variables have already been defined in the link provided above. Since this dataset has many target variables, I believe that it will require an approach resembling deep learning.

The dataset has already been split into the training and test data, with the training set accounting for more than 10 million samples, while the test set has 625000 samples. Since the training data has millions of samples and there are only 4 missing values, I will drop those samples. I intend to use the IQR method to identify any outliers and remove the samples containing them, if they are relatively infrequent. Otherwise, I anticipate that a log transformation will make outliers less impactful on any conclusions.

As part of the exploratory data analysis (EDA), I will first get the IQR of all the features, so I can identify outliers. Then, I will create a correlation matrix to see what features are related/irrelevant to each other. After that, I will use data visualizations like scatter plots, line plots, and heatmaps for additional exploration. This will allow me to create a more focused and plausible hypothesis. Depending on what relations are found between features, it may become beneficial to conduct a PCA, in order to reduce the dimensionality of the dataset (many features have 60 dimensions).

# Survey Existing Research
## Data Preparation
[Kaggle Notebok- Min-Hsien Weng](https://www.kaggle.com/code/minhsienweng/leap-data-divided-to-small-chunks)

This user used dask dataframe to load all 10 million samples into a single dataframe. He concatenated each small dataset to create the all-encompassing dataframe, ready for use in the notebook.

```
def get_data(csv_file_path):    
    # Read csv as a list of blocks
    ddf = dd.read_csv(csv_file_path, blocksize=f"{1024}MB") # 5 Gb of block size
#     for i in range(ddf.npartitions):
    for i in [0]:    
        # Save the data to a new CSV file
        folder = 'Leap_data_chunk'
        file_name = f"data_chunk_{i}.parquet"
        # Concatenate all chunks to form the final dataframe
        df_mb = ddf.partitions[i]  
        df_mb.to_parquet(folder, write_index=False,            # Don't write the index
                         name_function=lambda x:file_name
                        )

        # Display some information about the extracted data
        print(f"Extracted {len(df_mb)} number of rows")
        print(df_mb.info())
        print(f"Data chunk has been saved to '{file_name}'")
        del df_mb
        gc.collect()
```
[Kaggle Notebook- Ahmad Suliman](https://www.kaggle.com/code/ahmedelneim/data-preparation-atmospheric-physics)

This notebook covers how this user prepared and processed the dataset before conducting any exploratory data analysis on it. After loading all of the relevant files and creating a dataset without batching or shuffling, they used keras to normalize the data. Normalization is important because it puts features on an even playing ground, improving the model’s performance and accuracy.

```
def get_data(csv_file_path):    
    # Read csv as a list of blocks
    ddf = dd.read_csv(csv_file_path, blocksize=f"{1024}MB") # 5 Gb of block size
#     for i in range(ddf.npartitions):
    for i in [0]:    
        # Save the data to a new CSV file
        folder = 'Leap_data_chunk'
        file_name = f"data_chunk_{i}.parquet"
        # Concatenate all chunks to form the final dataframe
        df_mb = ddf.partitions[i]  
        df_mb.to_parquet(folder, write_index=False,            # Don't write the index
                         name_function=lambda x:file_name
                        )

        # Display some information about the extracted data
        print(f"Extracted {len(df_mb)} number of rows")
        print(df_mb.info())
        print(f"Data chunk has been saved to '{file_name}'")
        del df_mb
        gc.collect()
```

## Exploratory Data Analysis
[Kaggle Notebook- Gnanaprakash R](https://www.kaggle.com/code/gnanaprakashr/leap-eda-notebook1)

Before beginning any analysis, this user split the data to access statistics about the features and the targets separately, like mean, standard deviation, and IQR. He then has graphs showing the distribution of each of these target features, showing what are the most frequent values for that feature. He uses the same idea to compare the statistics of the training features, in both the training and test set. After that he creates a compact boxplot of all the multi-dimensional features in the dataset, resembling a time-series analysis. Then, he creates a correlation matrix, showing which target features are more related to other target features. He does this for the numerical features in both the training and test sets. After creating scatter plots for all of the features in both sets, the notebook is concluded by another correlation matrix.


## Model Training
[Kaggle Notebook- Ahmed Suliman](https://www.kaggle.com/code/ahmedelneim/model-training-atmospheric-physics)
After normalizing the data, this user used keras to create a model. By using hyperparameter tuning with his own tuner, he was able to create a graph of the R^2 score callback.

[Kaggle Notebook- Romulo Ferreira](https://www.kaggle.com/code/romulol/leap-xgboost)
After splitting the training and target features and standardizing the data, he used the following code to create his model.

```
model = XGBRegressor(
    n_estimators= 1150,
    max_depth=56,
    learning_rate=0.003,
    colsample_bytree=0.9,
    subsample=0.8,
    min_child_weight=1,
    random_state=42,
    objective='reg:squarederror',
    n_jobs=-1,  # Use all available cores
    tree_method='hist',
    device ='cuda',
)

r2_vector = []
mse_vector = []

y_pred_df = pd.DataFrame()
out_i =360
out_f=361
for i in range(out_i, out_f):
    
    model.fit(X_train, Y_train[:, i]) 
    y_pred = model.predict(X_val)
    y_pred_df[f'y_pred_{i}'] = y_pred
    
    # Calculate r
    r2 = r2_score(Y_val[:, i], y_pred)
    mse = mean_squared_error(Y_val[:, i], y_pred)
    print(f"{r2},{mse}")
    # Append scores to the lists
    r2_vector.append(r2)
    mse_vector.append(mse)

# Optionally convert lists to DataFrame for r2 and mse scores
r2_df = pd.DataFrame({'r2_score': r2_vector})
mse_df = pd.DataFrame({'mse_score': mse_vector})
```

[Kaggle Notebook- Romulo Ferreira](https://www.kaggle.com/code/romulol/leap-mlp)
This notebook uses a multilayer perceptron to see which hyperparameters are the most important and can produce a model that is the most accurate. To show his results, this user uses a parallel coordinate plot and contour plot to display his findings.
